Some of, you might have heard this before,
but I have another channel called business bla.
And that actually led to the development of this very product. Long story short,
I made a joke about how YouTubers all have these beauty lines.
And I found that channel, email me saying, Simon, you should make a beauty line,
but you should make some beard oil because you have a magnificent beard.
And I was like, I agree. And so we made beard, bla beard blaze makes a, a full,
luscious beard reality solving all of life's problems with fine facial hair.
Not a guarantee.
What happened is I teamed up with a fan of that channel called will.
He sent me a bunch of samples of beard oil. I tried them all in my beard.
I found the ones that worked best for me.
And then we made a whole range of them.
I've used a lot of beards over the last few years,
and basically I'm a bit biased,
but I think this the best one that I've ever tried also,
I always noticed that beard alls tend to come in tiny little bottles and be
super expensive.
So we made a proper size bottle and we made it at a proper price.
You can go to beard, blaze.com to find out more about that.
No discount codes, nothing special like that, because this is from me.
You could just go to the website and try it out. Then let's get into the video.
I'm ALA a cheat, a Charan, but at least I know it.
Those are the words of James Randy illustrating his unique,
direct and honest outlook on life.
Randy trained and worked as a magician for most of his life and a pretty
successful one too,
but then decided to retire from magic and become a professional debunk.
So what's he debunk well,
pretty much everything that had to do with the paranormal psychics, mediums,
faith healers, fortune tellers, spoon, benders,
they all practiced what Randy called. Woo woo.
Having spent most of his life in the world of magic.
Randy knew all of their secrets and how to use them against the people claiming
to have supernatural power.
Randy himself preferred to be called an investigator rather than a debunker,
arguing that the latter already proclaimed to know something was false and set
out to show everyone else.
While the former merely investigated specific claims from an objective starting
point. In other words,
Randy did not deal in absolute and did not outright dismiss entire concepts like
magic or faith healing.
The people who claimed to be doing them in this regard most famous of all was
his $1 million paranormal charge. The premise was simple. Come to his Institute,
prove any kind of supernatural ability under supervised laboratory controlled
conditions and win a million bucks.
The prize ended in 2015 unclaimed
James Randy was born Randall James Hamilton's w on August the seventh,
1928 in Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
He was one of three children to George's WGE and Marie Parus.
He adopted James Randy as his name later in life. But for simplicity's sake,
we are going to refer to him like that from now on his skeptical.
And inquiring mind showed up from an early age,
as he routinely got in trouble at Sunday school for constantly asking for proof
while his teacher read things from the Bible,
things went a bit differently in regular school where Randy showed a great
aptitude for learning,
but he advanced so far ahead of his class that eventually he grew bored and
started skipping school, mainly showing up only to take exams.
This provided Randy with a lot of free time,
which he needed to fill with something.
He visited a lot of museums and public libraries and also frequented many Matney
shows.
He went to one when he was 12 years old and forever altered the course of his
life. It was a magic show, performs owner of America's creator stage magicians,
Harry Black stone senior. The experience had an enchanting effect on young rans,
and he now knew what he wanted to do with the rest of his life.
Like most magicians, he started out small, mostly doing kids, birthday parties.
He became successful as a mentalist. And by the time he was 17 years old,
Randy already began performing in local nightclubs.
After dropping out of high school around this time,
he got his first experience as a deep bunker.
When he attended a spirit church in Toronto,
where the preacher claimed to read the minds of his parishioners by predicting
what statements they wrote down on papers placed inside sealed envelopes.
This was accomplished using a simple and common mentalism trick known as one
ahead, which as the name implies,
allows the performer to always learn one factor ahead of the ones that they
present out loud.
All that is necessary for the trick to work is for the mentalist to already know
one of the statements before the performance starts,
this can be accomplished through multiple ways. They could use slight of hands.
They could sneak a peek inside an envelope or simplest of all.
They could have an accomplice in the audience who would say the fake statement
belongs to them, regardless of what it is.
So the mentalist begins their performance by mind reading the first statement,
which is fake.
The plants in the audience says that one's mine and the performer then opens the
envelope, which the audience thinks contains that statements.
But of course it doesn't none of them do, but in doing so,
the mentalist reads and learns the actual statements that was in the envelope.
At that point, the hard work is already done. The mentalist is one ahead.
So he picks up another envelope, opens mind, reads it,
but says the true statements that they learned from the previous one,
this of course will get a positive response from someone in the audience.
So the performer opens the envelope and learns another true statement.
And so it goes until the end.
It doesn't matter if there are five envelopes or 500,
the mentalist can do them all in a row because they will always know one true
statement ahead of the ones presented.
Even though Rensy had been press practicing magic for a few years.
At this point,
he could easily spot the con and got very angry with the preacher.
He looked at the people around him and saw many of them having emotional
reactions.
Some with tears streaming down their face because they truly believed their
preacher had supernatural powers and all the while he was simply deceiving them
for money. Randy ran up on stage,
interrupted the performance and explained how the trick was done.
But there it actually received was not the one he was expecting.
The people were not grateful.
They didn't suddenly realize that they were being lied to. Instead.
They booed the young magician and told him that he was wrong.
The preacher's wife called the police and Randy was arrested for his efforts
that day. He learns a hard but important lesson.
One of the main reasons why everything he deemed woo woo worked so well was deep
down. People wanted to believe in them, even if it meant being deceived,
looking back on it,
James Randy reflected that that was the event that set him on the path of a
professional
For the moment. Randy was still focused on his burgeoning career as a magician,
despite his initial foray.
And mentalism he switched specialties to escapology because people kept on
believing. He had genuine psychic powers, despite his insistence,
that he was merely performing tricks.
He had people walk up to him and ask for blotto numbers or star tips.
And if he said that he was just a magician, they would reply with a sarcastic.
Sure you are with the wink in a nudge. Randy did not like this experience.
He felt uncomfortable. This, he understood the true power.
He held over his audience and how easily it could be abused for fame and fortune
by someone less scrupulous than him throughout the 1950s and sixties.
Randy built up a reputation as one of the most popular magicians in north
America. Although he taught in Europe and Asia, he still wins by his real name.
Randall's wind at this point, although he later changed it to the amazing Randy,
after a Quebec newspaper,
referred to him as let Randy his most popular trick stunts and delusions,
all that and elements of danger to them that kept the audience on its toes.
Even when some of them lasted for over half an hour,
Randy later admitted that at this stage in its career,
he was driven by a desire to outdo Harry Houdini to last longer than him and
make it more dangerous than he did.
One of Randy's most popular stunts took place in 1955.
When he got tied up in a straight jacket,
turned upside down and lifted six stories into the air over Broadway.
He escaped in two and a half minutes and later he would perform a similar daring
feat except that he was hung upside down over Niagara falls in 1974,
Randy said to Guinness world record for staying naked inside a block of eyes for
43 minutes and eight seconds.
All of his successes translated into crossover appeal for Randy who made
numerous TV, radio and stage appearances. During the 1960s,
he was a popular guest on the children's television show wonder ran in 9 73.
He joined Alice Cooper on his bill dollar babies tour appearing in each show as
the executioner who decapitated Cooper using a tri guillotine that he designed.
But really it was one show in particular,
which helped turn Randy into a household name.
The tonight show with Johnny Carson in his younger years,
Carson had trained as a magician and he also shared Randy's skepticism when it
came to supernatural claims, the two formed a close friendship,
and Randy became one of Johnny Carson's favorite guests appearing over 30 times
on the tonight show during Carson's tenure as host.
But of course,
magic did not end up being James Randy's main claim to fame ever since he was a
teenager. He promised that one day when he was famous and did a large platform,
he would use his knowledge and influence to expose the people he perceived as
being dishonest.
It was during the 1970s that Randy's career pivoted from magic focusing mainly
on paranormal investigations.
We cannot say what Randy's first debunking attempt was,
but we can certainly say which one made him famous in 1972,
he began a rivalry that which pretty much last for his entire, their life.
One against Yuri Galler born in Tel Aviv. Galler was at the time,
a popular and charismatic illusionist and mentalist known mainly for his act of
bending spoons, right in front of his audience, simply by holding them. However,
he claimed to do this as well as his other feets by using genuine psychic
powers. This bothered Randy.
So he called out gall and then challenged his powers on an infamous 1973 episode
of the night show. Like we already mentioned,
Johnny Carson was a bit of a skeptic himself.
Fury Gallo was supposed to be a guest on the show and was slated perform his
spoon bending. So Carson asked James Randy for help to prevent any trickery.
Randy solution was pretty straightforward.
Just do not let him use his own spoons. Have the show,
provide the props without telling GU and without letting him or anyone else from
his team handle them prior to the taping. The result was a predictable one,
a slow and embarrassing 20 minute segments where GU failed to make the spoons
even Twitch slightly before finally abandoning the tasks saying that he did not
feel strong that night.
The show was described in the New York times as a legendary emulation in which
gala offered up flustered excuses to his host as his abilities failed him again
and again, I sat there for 22 minutes.
Humiliated gala told me when I spoke to him in September,
I went back to my hotel, devastated.
I was about to pack up the next day and go back to Tel Aviv.
I thought that's it I'm destroyed.
You would think that such a performance would spell the end for gala's career,
but it actually had the opposite effect. It gave it a big boost proof.
Once again, that people want to believe these feets are real.
Even in the face of clear evidence to the contrary,
GU supporters argued that if his spoon bending was just a magic chick,
then surely he'd be able to repeat it every time.
Whereas true psychic powers would be, be more fickle than that weak.
Wow. Therefore in their minds,
the facts that GE could not bend spoons that night was proof that he could bend
spoons. This was only the start of Randy's efforts to debunk DE's claims,
but he faced an uphill battle,
as it seems like people were willing to believe in his supernatural powers,
no matter what. In 19 70,
80 published enough article a new scientist about a Yaha Kad Skylar's former
manager, who first brought him to international fame.
KA described many ways in which he claimed to have helped ke achieve his
illusion,
starting out by simply talking to people to obtain private information,
which he later relayed gall to make it seem like it came to him by E P for a TV
show in San Francisco. Kad said that he secretly looked sealed envelope,
tell gall thes before the start of the show,
during a meeting with the London publisher, KA left the phone off the hook.
So Gallo could hear what was being said from a different room during a live show
in Birmingham,
he alleged to a faked bomb scare so that Gallo would not have to perform after
finding out that the front row of the audience consisted mainly of professional
magicians. This was not enough to convince the true believers though.
The 1975 wrote a whole book titled the magic of Yuri Gallo,
which challenged the psychics claims of paranormal powers.
But that was still not enough.
If Randy was going to get serious about his career as a professional skeptic,
he was gonna need help.
Magicians have a longstanding tradit of debunking. Even prior to James Randy.
In his later years,
Harry Houdini became an art and enemy of mediums who claimed to speak with the
debt before him. One of the 20th century, most influential magicians,
John Neville Maline began his career by exposing two spiritualist brothers who
performed delusions and claimed to have supernatural powers after Randy's time.
He passed the bat to other performers, such as pen and tell or banner check.
That being said in his own time,
Randy didn't exactly receive unwavering support from his fellow magicians for
his investigative efforts.
Some were annoyed that he was exposing so many tricks of the trade while others
were content with knowing the truth for themselves.
And didn't see the point in going to all that trouble to reveal others' frauds.
Therefore Brandy sought assistance from other fields,
particularly the scientific community who was by and large,
also against claims of paranormal phenomena in 1976, James Randy,
co-founded the committee for the scientific investigation of claims of the
paranormal or CSI cop,
which later changed its name to the Pithia committee for skeptical inquiry or
CSI. The organization promoted scientific skepticism,
especially when it came to claims of the paranormal.
But it also personally investigated numerous claims of such supernatural
activities. Besides Randy other founders included professor Paul Kurtz,
who came up with the idea for psych op professors, Ray Hyman and Marcello,
Tru psychologist,
BF Skinner writer as Isaac Amar and Martin Gardner and astronomer Carl Sagan of
them all James Randy was the one most willing to travel the globe to debunk
fraudulent claims. And according to Hyman,
Randy became the ambassador of psycho ands the face of the skeptical movement
all over the world.
One of Randy's most famous cases as an investigator was the so-called Ben Veni
death in 1988, French immunology,
Ja Ben published a paper in nature.
One of the most prestigious science journals in the world where he presented his
idea of memory of water,
which by and large supported the concept of homeopathy.
This suggestion was immediately met with raised eyebrows from the scientific
community. So an independent committee was sent to verify Bennet day's results.
The committee consisted to for fraud investigator or to Stewart nature editor,
John Maddox and James Randy. They could not replicate the results.
And the journal dismissed the original article with Ben VE day portraying
himself as the victim of a witch hunt.
Another of Randy's biggest targets was Peter Popoff.
One of America's most popular televangelist during the 1980s who made a fortune
from acts of faith,
healing pop off would often call out attendees saying their names and their
illnesses in front of a stunned audience.
This was information he claimed to have received divinely,
but Randy showed that it was simply fed to him by his wife through a hidden air
piece. Before his show started,
Popoff collected this information either by having plants in the audience who
chatted with the people around them,
or by having attendees fill out prayer cards with all the details he needed.
Once Randy had the evidence,
he again turned Johnny Carson who was more than happy to expose pop a on the
tonight show. This led to a ton of negative publicity for the televangelist.
And he declared bankruptcy in 1987 and yet Randy's most notable act.
And arguably his most controversial was something.
He called project alpha instead of an investigation targeting specific
paranormal claims.
This was more of a hoax meant to show the world that scientists could be just as
easily fooled by skilled tricks as everybody else,
because they are not used to dealing with intentional deception.
The whole thing started in 1979 when James McDonald,
the engineer and chairman of McDonald Douglas aircraft used a $500,000 grant to
establish the McDonald laboratory for psychical research.
As McDonald was a believer in the paranormal,
those who shared his views expected this move to finally legitimize research
into parapsychology. At first,
Ren reached out to them with advice on how to create an efficient methodology
and how to avoid getting con even offered to act as a supervisor for the
experiments, but his help was rebuffed.
He then set out on a different path intending to prove that the methodology used
by the lab was floored and susceptible to trickery.
He did this with the help of two teenage magicians named Michael Edwards and
Steve shore.
The latter would ultimately adopt the stage name banner check and has become one
of Randy's most prominent proteges,
even serving as the director for Randy's foundation.
But for now he and Edwards were just two skilled mentalists who were opposing as
psychics, unsurprisingly.
They soon became prize subjects at the McDonald laboratory with nobody else
getting results anywhere close to them. According to Ren,
one important elements of project Arthur was that Sean Edwards would answer
truthfully if they were ever asked if they were cheating and they would come
clean about the entire hoax.
Apparently they were never a asked this once during the entire four years that
they served as test subjects.
Eventually Randy revealed the deception in 1983 in an issue of discover magazine
reactions to the hoax were mixed and ranged from one extreme to the other,
some heavily criticized Randy for the deception while others praised him and
pointed out that it had accomplished exactly what it set out to do.
Showing that scientists were not in foul and that they are not trained to deal
with cons.
His fellow SYOP members calls it a landmark moments in the scientific study of
paranormal phenomena. Meanwhile,
the McDonald lab lost its funding was shut down a couple of years later,
Although Ren was a prominent member of SYOP. It was his involvement with,
of a different organization that brought him even more notoriety,
particularly within the paranormal community. In 1996,
he founded that James Randy educational foundation,
or J R E F the company's missions were to continue investigating paranormal
and other pseudo scientific claims while educating the public about skepticism
and critical thinking.
The J R E F did lots of D to advance its goals for over a decade.
It hosted the largest annual conference of skeptics known as the amazing
meeting. It also gave out the Pegasus award semi-regular trophies,
mockingly offered to the biggest peds of woo woo of that year.
But the thing it is most famous for is the $1 million challenge,
which would've paid out a prize of a million dollars to anyone who could exhibit
paranormal abilities under lab conditions.
The idea first started in 1964 during a radio show when Randy was challenged by
a para psychologist to put his money where his mouth is, Randy agreed.
Although the prize was of course,
much smaller back then he offered a thousand dollars to anyone who could show
him supernatural powers during a control test. Randy liked the idea after all,
what better way was the there for someone with genuine powers to prove
themselves than by humiliating.
One of the country's leading skeptics and walking away with his money.
He soon up the offer to $10,000. Then during the late 1980s,
he was part of a television program where the prize was increased to a hundred
thousand dollars.
Although the rest of the money was supplied by the broadcasting company.
Eventually thanks to a donation by internet entrepreneur, Rick Adams,
Randy permanently increased the prize to a million dollars ever since the 1960s
around a thousand people have tried taking Randy up on his offer.
According to the official guidelines,
the exact circumstances of the tests were agreed upon in advance by both parties
afterwards could not be changed no matter what.
This was a big sticking point with Randy who argued that way too often.
Other supposedly scientific studies skewed their results in favor of the
paranormal by accepting various excuses from their subjects and allowing them to
change the tests on the fly under his stricter rules,
none of the applicants have even pass the preliminary tests,
which performed before the formal test that would certify the results most have
failed. It, others have just refused to take it. Randy's money.
Challenges lasted for decades, but went unclaimed in 2015,
the 87 year old Randy retired from everything from investigations from the J R E
F. It was decided that it was about time that the money was put to better use.
So the $1 million challenge was discontinued and instead J R E F now awards,
grants to deserving people and nonprofits. As for James Randy,
he lived out his remaining years, quietly before passing away in 2020 age,
92 half jokingly.
He mentioned that his final wish would be to be cremated and have his ashes
thrown in Yuri gala's eyes.
So I really hope you enjoyed this video.
Please remember to check out beard Blas.
There is a link of that below and as always, thank you for watching.